It’s 27 minutes to 12.
Now, I’m not going to attempt to
pronounce the name of my next guest,
because I couldn’t do it justice.
So, you will have to tell me
your name yourself,
and pronounce it for me.
Would you like to?
All right.
Yes, please. Then what is it?
My name is Mataji Nirmala Devi.
Mataji Nirmala Devi.
Now, if I’m going to use
one of those names, which one will I use?
Use Mataji.
Mataji, Mataji. All right.
Now, welcome into the studio
this morning.
In the literature which has been
handed to me about you,
you are described as ‘being someone who,
in her own homeland,
is regarded as the
world’s greatest living saint’.
Now, can you explain that to me?
The saint is a personality
who is in contact with the Divine.
And we had many saints before also,
all over the world,
who were in contact with the Divine.
And they tried to explain
what is divinity is,
and that they said, all of them
inclusive of Christ,
that we have to be born again,
that we have to achieve
a higher state of awareness.
But it could not be done
on a mass scale.
In my lifetime, I worked out a method
by which we can have
a mass scale ascent of human beings.
That’s the last breakthrough
of our evolutionary process,
which is a living process
and which works out this ascent.
And this is a breakthrough
that individuals can have
to some sort of higher level
of consciousness, something like that?
Yes, like that.
Would you explain to me
a little more about that?
The higher level of consciousness,
because we have to, first of all,
as a hypothesis, you can accept.
But you should have an open mind
like a scientist,
that we have two things
of which we are not aware.
The first thing is that,
we are surrounded,
or we are penetrated and looked after,
nourished, by a subtle Power
which is called as a divine Power.
We can call it as a ‘Ruh’,
we can call it as the All-pervading
Power of God’s love;
call it by any name.
And this Power organizes us,
looks after all living processes,
does all the development and
evolution of human beings, everything.
Is this what is referred to
as the Kundalini?
No, not that’s. That’s not right.
That’s the reflection of the Holy Ghost,
as we call it.
But the Kundalini is the connection
between ourselves, our attention,
and this All-pervading Power.
But the result is that
in our own being,
there is another great thing
called as Spirit,
which is the reflection of God Almighty,
in our heart.
The light of that Spirit
comes into our attention
and we become enlightened.
As a result,
as you ask Me the question,
new awareness gives you
collective consciousness.
It means you feel it,
on your central nervous system,
your own subtle centres
and the centres of another person.
This is called also in Sanskrit
as ‘bodha’,
which is used in Buddha’s teachings,
that you have to have it
on your central nervous system,
you have to feel it.
And the same in the early Christians,
they used to call it ‘Gnostics’.
The ‘Gna’ word come from
the Sanskrit word ‘gnya’,
which means you have to know it
on your central nervous system.
It’s not mentally you should know.
So you experience this divine somehow
in a physical sense through your body,
through your nervous system?
Yes.
And I noticed, and this Spirit,
you experience by some sort of coolness
above your head.
All over.
Yes.
You can feel the cool,
very slightly cooler,
and it’s a kind of a vibratory awareness
you get, a vibratory awareness.
Now, there are, in among the literature
that I’ve been given,
photographs of people
that you are meeting.
And they have there
in thousands of people
have come to your meetings in Australia
and elsewhere throughout the world.
There are photographs of people
with their hands above their heads.
Yes. They feel the cool breeze
coming out of their fontanel bone area.
When the Kundalini pierces
through this area,
that is the actualization of baptism.
So this is a sort of a conduit
to the Divine
and it’s coming through
the top of their heads?
Yes, also.
Can anyone do this?
Could our listeners do this?
So what would they have to do
to feel it?
If they are listening to the radio,
and if they can put their hands
towards the radio, like this,
they might feel it,
because people are quite ready to get it.
Can you convey this?
Or, I mean, are you yourself
a sort of a channel
for this spiritual force?
Yes, it can work out that way.
Yes, right.
Does one have to believe to feel this?
No, no, no.
Blind belief doesn’t help.
First, you must feel it
and then believe it.
It is not going to be blind belief.
You must experience it.
Blind belief really leads to fanaticism.
Yes. So by putting the hands out
or above the head,
you feel this coolness in the palms?
Yes, you can feel the coolness
coming out of your fontanel bone area
like a jet sometimes.
And then you start feeling it
on your fingertips.
But then you have to come to the center
to understand fully
the knowledge about it.
Yes, right.
Now, one of the things you have said
is that,
and this is not an uncommon thing
that one hears said these days,
that illness is frequently a reflection
of what you might call
a lack of balance within the personality.
And I was particularly interested,
because I am a diabetic,
and I see here a Mother’s
thoughtless cure for diabetes
and this story begins:
Diabetes is not the result
of taking too much sugar,
but it’s caused by too much thinking,
according to you.
Can you help me here
by explaining to me
how my diabetes is caused
by too much thinking?
All right.
I do a great deal of thinking.
It’s quite true, by the way.
All right.
Now you see, diabetes is caused
by an imbalance within us.
There’s one center which we call
Swadisthana, the second center,
which looks after the aortic plexus,
on medical terminology,
can understand the physical side.
Now it has got one work
of which I think the doctors
are not yet aware:
that when you think too much,
your grey cells are used
and they have to be replaced.
So the fat cells are converted
for the use of replacement
of those grey cells.
As a result this,
the person who thinks too much,
this chakra, this one what you call
the Swadisthana,
goes into too much action
in converting those fat cells
for the use of the brain.
So it neglects the other side of it.
The other side is that
it has to look after the liver.
It has to look after the pancreas.
It has to look after
the spleen and the kidneys,
and part of the intestines.
That’s the job of this
Swadisthana centre.
And when it is busy with one only,
it neglects others.
As a result, the pancreas has to do
the job of not getting diabetes,
or you can say of absorbing the sugar.
But because the whole pressure
is on thinking, of a personality,
then this Swadisthana has to work
only for this work.
Now, it’s intriguing.
So too much energy is being used up
with all this cogitating and thinking,
Yes. And that is the-
And it’s putting too much stress
on the pancreas,
which can’t do its job.
Is that really what you’re saying there?
That’s an imbalance.
You see, the energy which is
for everything else,
you just spend it for one part
of the work, one function,
and the rest of the functions
are neglected.
That’s how you develop liver troubles,
you get high blood pressure.
The worst is blood cancer.
So a remedy for this might-
is the remedy for the center
is think less?
Or spend less time
in intellectual pursuits?
No, it’s not. It’s not that way.
It’s by through Kundalini awakening.
Your thoughts, you see,
which are too much all the time
bombarding you –
we live on thoughts.
Like one thought rises, falls off,
another thought rises, falls off.
The thing between,
there’s a little space,
that is for the present.
We live on the past or the future.
This is a bad cough you have.
Very bad, talking too much.
I’m wondering whether you have been
too much thinking.
Talking. No, no, not that.
Because of too much talking.
Too much talking, yes!
Too much talking.
Of course, yes.
I’m too much talking.
So now what happens,
that when the Kundalini rises,
we are thinking about the past
or the future all the time,
not of the present.
When the Kundalini rises,
our thoughts become smaller
and this area of present increases.
So if you want to think, you think it.
Otherwise, you can stop thinking.
So you rise into another great dimension
called as thoughtless awareness,
where you can be thoughtless
and aware.
Well, we’ll talk about that
in just a minute.
All right, so we’ll come back
to that subject, in just a minute.
Give your voice a rest
for a moment or two.
Have a lolly and a cup of something.
Well, I talk to John Latimer...
Hello, John.
You’re not going to talk to me?
Good morning, John.
Oh! Hello, Brian. How are you?
Hello, I don’t know quite what happened
there something’s strange.
I’m very well.
Thank you, very well indeed.
I feel sorry for that lady
with a sore throat
because I’m down with it too.
Oh, are you really?
Yes, this morning when I got up,
I was scared I was going to die.
Now, I’m scared I won’t die.
Why? Are you feeling really terrible?
Oh, the old flu back.
It’s air conditioning in the car,
I think.
Oh, it really is that what it is?
That is what I am blaming.
What?
Now this John Latimer
is one of our advertisers
and I talk to him from time to time.
What can he do about his flu
and his sore throat?
Can you help him with that?
It’s a serious question.
That also comes from liver problems.
You see, if you have a bad liver,
then the heat rises above
and that gives you this problem
of melting your phlegm,
and that’s how you get it.
Now, if you have to talk like me
all the time,
then also you might get it.
So you must give some rest
of your throat.
Give the message to yourself.
All right.
Yes, he should take a rest.
Well, yes, my guess says,
“You must take a rest, John”.
Go and lie on some of your
lovely carpet somewhere.
And with some honey.
With hot water and honey.
I’ve done it.
Oh, he’s done.
And that helped me lot.
Honey.
Honey, yes. All right.
Ok, John.
Ok.
Thank you very much. Bye, bye.
Thank you.
That’s our guest for the next ten
or fifteen minutes or so,
Mataji Devi, as I said,
is described in her homeland in India,
as the world greatest living saint.
In Italy, in 1986,
she was voted as the personality
of the year of there.
We’ve been talking about balance
in the personality.
What did I ask you
whether what you are saying
is very different as large number
of people are saying.
I had numerous guests
who come on to the program,
who arrange in this sort of area,
who say that,
“We have lost the balance
in our lives”,
that we are out of balance.
Correct.
The Yin and Yang or whatever you call it,
are not in balance.
Are we thinking too much
and feeling too little?
Is that what one of the problems?
Balance of the sides because,
you see, right side,
we have a right side and a left side.
In the brain.
And two sympathetic nervous systems.
Now the right-side deals
with your physical and mental aspects.
It nourishes that.
And the left side,
with your desire and emotions,
your subconscious mind,
collective subconscious mind.
So now, if you’re thinking too much,
you’re on the right side.
If you’re going onto the right side
too much, naturally, you’ll feel less
because you have less of emotions.
That happens and imbalances
then create problems.
Now, to achieve the balance
is not to go to the left side.
Like people take two drinks,
because they want to go
to the left side.
But actually, the best way
is to awaken the central path.
If the central path is awakened,
then both the sides are pulled in
and you get automatically balanced.
That is what is Sahaja Yoga.
How do we do that?
And how do we awaken the central path?
That’s what is the awakening
of this Kundalini,
which is the power within you
in the triangular bone,
which must be awakened,
which passes through the six centres
and makes the person
balanced automatically.
It’s a spontaneous happening.
It’s a living process.
It’s a spontaneous happening,
but how does one do it?
It’s very simple.
As I told you, just put hands towards it.
It works out.
Now, supposing you get your Realization,
you can give it to others.
It passes from one person to another.
Like one enlightened light
enlightens another light
or another candle
which is not yet enlightened.
It’s very simple.
Certainly.
But now, where does one put one’s hands
to do this?
Just you –
And what does one think or feel?
No, no, nothing to be felt.
Nothing to be felt, no?
It’s just spontaneous.
Just put the hands like this
and it works. It just works.
Now, my listeners can’t see that,
of course.
You’re simply putting your hands
in front of you,
like someone waiting
to be handed a gift.
Yes. Just it works. It works.
You start feeling a cool breeze.
You feel completely relaxed
and you feel the cool breeze
coming out of your head.
But then you have to know
about the technique part of it.
Yoga means your union with the Divine.
It doesn’t mean standing on your head.
It means union with the Divine.
For a lot of people,
it does mean standing on your head,
you know?
Yes.
A lot of people who are listening
to our program
are probably going off to yoga lessons.
Yes that’s it. It is not.
And they will regard those mainly
as physical exercise sort of sessions.
No, it is to be done, exercises,
scientifically,
understanding wherever is the problem.
So when the Kundalini rises,
you can make out where is the problem is,
where does it stop.
And that is the centre to be attended to.
If you need any physical help,
then you must help it.
But the way people are doing yoga today
is, again,
they are going onto the right side
very much.
And such a person can be very dry,
can be very aggressive.
So is best is to understand
the balancing process first of all.
Get your full ideas
to where the is problem,
and then work it out,
if you need any exercise or not,
and do it accordingly.
But the way people are doing these days,
yoga,
is like taking all the medicine boxes
into your stomach.
But you mentioned extremely serious
illnesses like cancer, blood leukaemia.
Yes. There are many cases.
You’re saying to me
that there are many cases
of people being cured of leukaemia
by these methods?
Yes, and we have certificates of them.
But people are so casual about everything.
That’s the trouble,
they’re very casual.
Till they get sick, they’re very casual.
They don’t take things seriously
in the West, especially.
But only in Russia,
I’ve found people are very serious.
Even the ministry and everyone
took it so seriously,
they have given us
an independent charge there.
And they have seen all our certificates
and everything.
You mentioned Russia just now.
And of course, at the moment,
there are great changes taking place
in Russia, via Mr. Gorbachev.
I think I read somewhere
in the literature about you,
you thought of him as a person
who is virtually a saint.
Yes, he is.
Well, explain how.
Most of us thought of Russian leaders
as devils, not saints.
They were. Not him.
Well, tell me about him.
They were.
How is he a saint?
You see, I must say that
he has seen the point.
One thing especially,
which I always saw that,
that if one side between these
two highly powered countries
decides to recede,
the other side will have to
particularly go down,
because there’s nothing to hit.
And that’s what he has done.
And you can see it through his vibrations.
You can feel his vibrations.
The first day I saw him,
I could feel it.
Tell me more. What could you see,
what could you feel?
So now you see, he’s a man
who should be supported by everyone.
Instead of that,
everybody’s trying to run him down
and helping him is not there.
Like now, these people from other,
Ukraine, and other places,
are trying to trouble him.
You must understand
they are stupid people.
They don’t know what they want.
Especially the Islamic people
who are fundamentalists there,
are actually helped by Iranians.
And these Iranians are penetrating
into that area,
and then Americans should not
support them there,
I mean, in a way,
indirectly supporting Iranians.
So you know what these
fundamentalists are doing.
So why do you support them
against Gorbachev
who is doing a good work?
So just out of competition,
we should not try to be degrade him.
He is doing a good job.
You must try to understand.
All right. Put in a little break.
The world, of course,
is in a terrible state.
We all seem to agree on that.
Are you a believer in the return
of some sort of messiah or not?
Or that everything is about to end?
Or there is…?
No, no.
No.
Our creator is going to look after us.
He’s not going to allow us
to destroy ourselves, at all.
But we must take some sense
into our heads and understand.
If something is working out,
why not pay some attention to it?
Well, Gorbachev included.
Of course.
Let’s just say we must change.
Mankind must change.
In what way do we have to change?
We have to transform into a new awareness
of collective consciousness.
Then there is no argument.
There’s no conflict,
there’s no difference of opinion
because everybody knows the absolute truth
and they reside by it.
Now we are working in 40 nations.
There’s no problem with them.
Everybody is united
because you can feel the truth.
There’s a very interesting hypothesis
been put forward recently
called the ‘Gaia hypothesis’.
Have you heard of this?
And it’s the idea that the universe
is sort of one being,
Correct.
And that we are all
sort of cells within that being.
Correct.
So I’m actually not separate
from the world and the things around us.
Correct.
Would do, you accept that?
That’s what it is and that’s what I say.
You’re a part and parcel of the whole.
But you have to become.
You’re not aware of it.
That awareness only comes
when you get connected.
And getting connected to the Divine.
It is absolutely correct.
And getting connected to the Divine,
so we have the Kundalini coming up,
coming up through the head.
Yes.
Through the fontanel area,
is that what you say?
Yes. Just like this connection
as to be to the mains.
And what’s going to happen to me?
If I achieve this,
then what will I feel and experience?
The first experience will be, of course,
of a cool breeze and all that.
But then you can feel your own centres
on your fingertips, you see.
You can feel what problems you have.
If you know how to correct them,
you get corrected yourself.
You can feel the centres of others,
and if you know what is wrong with them
and if you know how to correct them,
you can get them corrected.
This is fairly extraordinary!
No, nothing. It’s simple.
Now what’s extraordinary is that
I have this cool spot
above my left hand.
Good, great.
I’m quite serious!
That’s quite extraordinary.
I have this, quite like a breeze,
Yes, it’s, that’ it.
In my left hand just sitting here.
So, now.
Now see your diabetes disappear very soon.
No, let’s try that.
No, I don’t feel the cool.
I feel I’m actually holding it.
Because there’s a little-
Because there’s a little imbalance,
as I told you.
That will work out.
Right side is the problem.
But now it will work out, very soon.
Now, has this got to do
with you being here?
That I’m feeling that or not?
Yes, of course. Yes.
I must admit it very humbly.
That’s quite extraordinary!
I’m not telling you. It’s there!
Now it’s there on your head also.
Can you feel it?
Yes, it’s there too.
Yes.
It’s quite extraordinary.
I’m not joking. I am not making this up.
You have to be honest, yes.
I’m probably the most sceptical person
on this station.
I have a cool puddle of air.
That’s what I’m saying.
Above my left hand. And-
See now.
Now that’s what I’m saying.
It’s so easy,
but people don’t take to anything.
They want Me to charge
some money for them.
Now, how much would I charge
for this invaluable thing?
Well, as I’ve got the cool air
above my hand,
and the breeze above my head.
Of course.
So I’m on the way now.
On the way to being all right
with your diabetes.
I may be able to chuck away
the little thing
I have to pierce my finger with
every day to check my diabetes.
So, you’d better see these people
and get your diabetes all right.
I have it in my hand. I’m serious.
I’ve got Sue and Tansley there
looking at me as if I was mad,
and I have this ball of cold air
between my hand.
Just see now. See, you’re a seeker
of truth. That’s why you got it.
They’re all out here laughing.
It’s absolutely the case.
No, I’m quite serious. It’s there.
I came in here,
really sceptical of this,
totally sceptical of this,
“Well another silly woman’s coming in
to tell me a lot of rubbish”.
And it is quite-
It’s there, yes.
It’s quite, that’s good.
It’s there.
Yes. And that’s the trouble is.
It’s all around the place now.
So this is very much.
We may have to take this up
again someday, I think,
because I’ve run out of time
his morning.
But I will give you
my unqualified recommendation that,
that happened.
That has just happened to me,
quite extraordinary.
And if your diabetes is cured.
Moving around with my hand.
Moving around.
And if your diabetes also is cured.
Then you have to say ‘yes’.
Then I’ll say ‘yes’. I will.
All right. Thank you very much.
You can call him sometime.
I will.
And he would be of help.
All right, fine.
Biran could be of help to you.
OK. I will.
Thank you very much for coming in.
We’ve run out of time.
All right, thank you.
We’ll leave your number,
if people want to find out where you are,
at the station.
Thank you very much.
Thank you so much. Bye.